.if !\n(.g \{\
.   if !\w|\*(lq| \{\
.       ds lq ``
.       if \w'\(lq' .ds lq "\(lq
.   \}
.   if !\w|\*(rq| \{\
.       ds rq ''
.       if \w'\(rq' .ds rq "\(rq
.   \}
.\}
.
.ie \n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.el \{\
. de MTO
\\$2 \(laemail: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
. de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.\}

.TH ROC-DEVICE-TREE 1

.SH NAME
ROC-DEVICE-TREE - device tree information for the Red Oak Canyon PowerHAT Power Management Board

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B roc-device-tree

.SH DESCRIPTION

Raspberry Pi HAT boards are required to contain a personality EEPROM that contains a hardware description
of the HAT board itself.  The information is contained in an entity called a device-tree-blob.  At boot 
time, the HAT blob is merged into the overall system device tree.

Composing and editing a device tree blob is far beyond the scope of this man page.  The intent of this 
man page is to describe the contents and purpose in the particluar case of the PowerHAT board, and to
explain how to invoke options built into the device-tree blob.

.SH OVERVIEW OF THE PowerHAT DEVICE-TREE-BLOB

The PowerHAT device-tree blob describes two major hardware features:

1) the GPIO pin numbers and pin configuration used for the power controller on the PowerHAT
2) the A2D converter

.SS GPIO information

There are seven GPIO required to control and observe the PowerHAT power controller.  The device-tree blob defines the 
GPIO channel for each I/O, the direction, in or out, for each channel, and wheather that channel requires a
pull-up to function properly. The device-tree blob also gives "device-tree parameter" names to the GPIO
channels.  They are listed here with the (BCM) gpio channel number that is pre-programmed into the device-tree blob:

 roc_req_off_b=5 
 roc_cs_b=6 
 roc_off=12 
 roc_pgood=13 
 roc_ud_b=16  
 roc_d2_b=20   
 roc_d1_b=26 

In the event that the control function to gpio channel is changed in hardware, the change has to be reflected in the
device-tree for the board to operate properly.  This can be accomplished two ways:

1) overriding the pre-programmed value by including dtparam= commands in /boot/config.txt (preferred)

2) editing and recompling the device-tree blob in HATPowerBoard/device-tree and placing the result in /boot/overlays.

As option 1 has been provided and option 2 is beyond the scope of this man page, option 2 will be left as 
a learning exercise for the reader.

To override a pin channel, prepend the string dtparam= to the parameter name above, and place it into /boot/config.txt.
For example, to change the req_off pin from gpio channel 5 to gpio channel 17, put:

dtpram=roc_req_off=17

into /boot/config.txt.  Use one dtparam= command for each of the pins that require overriding.

\fBNOTE:  It is very important that  dtparam= commands be placed prior to any other dtoverlay= command
in the config.txt file!!\fR

.SS Analog to Digital Converter Information

The MCP3004 four channel analog to digital converter is also described in the device-tree blob.  Describing it
in the device-tree causes Raspbian to automatically load the module at boot time.  While there are definate
advantages to this, there are some disadvantage too, so the device-tree blob has parameters defined to control
the automatic loading of the module via dtparam= commands placed into /boot/config.txt.

The two parameters and their legal values are:

 rocusedriver=<yes or no>
 rocusespi=<no or yes>

\fBNOTE:  It is very important that  dtparam= commands be placed prior to any other dtoverlay= command
in the config.txt file.  Also, only one of these parameters should be defined as "yes" or there will be
a boot error and neither option will work.\fR

.SHADAPTING TO NON-HAT Raspberry Pi's

When the PowerHAT is installed on a non-HAT compliant Raspberry Pi, the I2C used for the PowerHAT EEPROM is not 
available on the P1 connector, yet the device-tree blob is still required for proper operation.  In these cases,
the device-tree blob can be loaded from /boot/overlays using a dtoverlay= command in the /boot/config.txt:

First:
sudo cp HATPowerBoard/device=tree/rocpower-overlay.dtb /boot/overlays/.

then add:
dtoverlay=rocpower-overlay 

to the \fBEND\fR of config.txt.  Any dtparam= commands required to remap the gpios should be placed immediately \fBAFTER\fR the
dtoverlay=rocpower-overlay command an before any other dtoverlay=commands.

.SHDISABLING LOADING of the EEPROM

The loading of the PowerHAT EEPROM can be completly disabled by adding:

dtoverlay=

\fBBEFORE\fR any other dtoverlay= command.


.SH SEE ALSO
.SS Regular man pages
rocpmd(1)

.SS Project Readme
.URL https://github.com/readoakcanyon/HATPowerBoard/README.md

.SS The Device Tree Overlay
The Raspberry PI foundation's device tree documentation:
.br
.URL https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/device-tree.md
.br
The Red Oak canyon device tree source:
.br
.URL https://github.com/redoakcanyon/HATPowerBoard/blob/hardware/device-tree/rocpower-overlay.dts

.SS Websites
The Red Oak Canyon web site:
.URL http://redoakcanyon.com


